---
layout:     post
title:      Keras Hack #1
date:       2019-02-06 12:31:00
author:     Jacob Richeimer
summary:    Adding weight decay to a Keras model
categories: keras
thumbnail:  wrench
tags:
 - keras
 - weight-decay
---

Weight decay, or L2 regularization is a common regularization method used in training neural networks.
The idea is to add a term to the loss which signifies the magnitude of the weight values in the network,
thereby encouraging the weight values to decrease during the training process.

Intuitively, there are different ways to think about the benefit of weight decay. One way to think about it is that
only weights which consistently affect the predictions throughout the dataset will be tuned accordingly,
while the weights which are just responding to noise which has little to no effect on the loss, those weights will
be overcome by the weight decay term and will steadily decrease toward zero.

Another way to think about it is as a sort of prior. We assume that the model which can perform the task at hand
can be represented with small weights, and that the presence of overly large weights signifies an attempt to fit
to outliers or noise in the dataset - the dreaded "overfitting" scenario.

Anyhow, Keras has a built-in `Regularizer` class, and common regilarizers, like L1 and L2, can be added to each layer
independently. This means, that if you want a weight decay with coefficient `alpha` for all the weights in your network,
you need to add an instance of `regularizers.l2(alpha)` to each layer with weights (typically `Conv2D` and `Dense` layers)
as you initialize them. See the exaples in the [Keras docs][1].

The way this is set up, however, can be annoying. Firstly, it's tedious to be adding a regularizer every time you
initialize a new layer, especially if your code contains many layer initializations. This can be circumvented somewhat
by creating wrapper functions for common "blocks" of the network (e.g. a residual convolutional block), so that the regularizers
are hidden inside the wrapper and don't litter your code.

But another common problem arising from this setup is if you're using an out-of-the-box Keras model from another code base,
or loading a pre-trained model file. As an example, let's say you want to use a ResNet50 architecture to fit to your data.
Luckily, Keras Applications has a [function][2] which will return a ResNet50 as a Keras model. But now, what if I want to train
that model with weight decay? The layers already exist; they're initialized inside the `keras.applications.ResNet50` function.

This calls for a bit of a hack. What we have to do here is access those layers on which we want to apply regularizers,
and apply them. We'll loop through the `model.layers` and if the layer type is `Conv2D` or `Dense`, then we'll manually
call a regularizer on the layer's weights and add the result to that layer's loss. This is essentially the same thing that
happens when you initialize a layer with a regularizer to begin with.

```python
model = keras.applications.ResNet50(include_top=True, weights='imagenet')
alpha = 0.00002  # weight decay coefficient

for layer in model.layers:
    if isinstance(layer, keras.layers.Conv2D) or isinstance(layer, keras.layers.Dense):
        layer.add_loss(keras.regularizers.l2(alpha)(layer.kernel))
    if hasattr(layer, 'bias_regularizer') and layer.use_bias:
        layer.add_loss(keras.regularizers.l2(alpha)(layer.bias))

```

Make sure to do this *before* compiling the model. After that, you're ready to train!

One more thing, though. If the model you're doing this with contains Depthwise Convolution layers, and you want to apply
weight decay to those layers as well, you need an extra if statement in the above loop, since the variables containing
the `DepthwiseConv2D` layer's weights have different names. You also have to be careful, since `DepthwiseConv2D`
inherits from `Conv2D`, so `isinstance(layer, keras.layers.Conv2D` will return `True` in both cases. Thus, if you want to use
a Mobilenet, for example, which is also available in Keras Applications, you've got to add the following:

```python
model = keras.applications.MobileNet(include_top=True, weights='imagenet', alpha=1., depth_multiplier=1)
alpha = 0.00002  # weight decay coefficient

for layer in model.layers:
    if isinstance(layer, keras.layers.DepthwiseConv2D):
        layer.add_loss(keras.regularizers.l2(alpha)(l.depthwise_kernel))
    elif isinstance(layer, keras.layers.Conv2D) or isinstance(layer, keras.layers.Dense):
        layer.add_loss(keras.regularizers.l2(alpha)(layer.kernel))
    if hasattr(layer, 'bias_regularizer') and layer.use_bias:
        layer.add_loss(keras.regularizers.l2(alpha)(layer.bias))

```

(Note: In the original [Mobilenet paper][3], the authors note that " Additionally, we found that it was important to put very
little or no weight decay (l2 regularization) on the depthwise filters since their are so few parameters in them." Many open-source
implementations of Mobilenet, though, do apply weight decay on the depthwise filters to an equal measure. More experimentation
is required to see how much effect this has in practice.)



[1]: https://keras.io/regularizers/
[2]: https://keras.io/applications/#resnet50
[3]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04861
